Windows xp Tips - Part 1

1) Cracking Windows XP Login Password

download the nice and easy Nt/2k/xp password cracker from
http://www.astalavista.com/

or other way is



if u get acess to the computer then go to Start>Run and type

“control userpasswords2” without Quotes and a new pop up windows will
open and u will reach

to user account properties.

Here u can Reset the Administrator and any Users password so anytime
when u Want to use the

Computer start it in safemode pressing F8 at Booting get into the xp as
u have Administrator password and go to Controlpanel>Useraccounts and
create a New Account .Start Computer

Normally and get into WinXP with ur newely made account and do ur job.

(Don’t forget to Delete ur newely made account Otherwise u will be in
trouble)

Delete ur account again starting the computer in Safemode as
Administrator and Delete ur

Account.









2)Disable XP Boot Logo



It is possible to disable the XP splash screen, which will slightly
speed up the overall boot process.  Be aware that removing the splash
screen will also cause you not to see any boot-up messages that might
come up (chkdsk, convert ...  ), but if your system runs without any
problems then it should not matter.



Edit boot.ini.

Add " /noguiboot" right after "/fastdetect".

Upon restarting, the splash screen will be gone.  It can be re-enabled
by removing the new switch.





3)Turn Off Indexing to Speed Up XP



Windows XP keeps a record of all files on the hard disk so when you do a
search on the hard drive it is faster.  There is a downside to this and
because the computer has to index all files, it will slow down normal
file commands like open, close, etc.  If you do not do a whole lot of
searches on your hard drive then you may want to turn this feature off:



Open My Computer.

Right-click your hard drive icon and select Properties.

At the bottom of the window you'll see "Allow indexing service to index
this disk for faster searches," uncheck this and click ok.

A new window will pop up and select Apply to all folders and subfolders.

It will take a minute or two for the changes to take affect but then you
should enjoy slightly faster performance.





4)Clean Your Prefetch to Improve Performance



This is a unique technique for WinXP.  We know that it is necessary to
scrub registry and TEMP files for Win9X/ME/2000 periodically.  Prefetch
is a new and very useful technique in Windows XP.  However, after using
XP some time, the prefetch directory can get full of junk and obsolete
links in the Prefetch catalog, which can slow down your computer
noticeably.



Open C(system drive):/windows/prefetch, delete those junk and obsolete
files, reboot.  It is recommended that you do this every month.







5)Performance Increase Through My Computer



Easy enough tweak to usually find out about it on your own, but still,
some of us still don't find it right away.  So here it is:



Start > right-click on My Computer and select Properties.

Click on the "Advanced" tab.

See the "Performance" section?  Click "Settings".

Disable the following:



Fade or slide menus into view

Fade or slide ToolTips into view

Fade out menu items after clicking

Show Shadows under menus

Slide open combo boxes

Slide taskbar buttons

Use a background image for each folder type

Use common tasks in folders

There, now Windows will still look nice and perform faster.







6)Reduce 10 Second Scandisk Wait Time



Start MS Dos Prompt (Start run CMD), and type:  CHKNTFS /T:4

where 4 is the amount of wait time.



CHKNTFS /?

for more info.







7)DMA Mode on IDE Devices



Just like Windows 2000, Windows XP still fails to set the DMA mode
correctly for the IDE device designated as the slaves on the primary IDE
and secondary IDE channels.  Most CD-ROMS are capable of supporting DMA
mode, but the default in XP is still PIO.  Setting it to DMA won't make
your CD-ROM faster, but it will consume less CPU cycles.  Here's how:



Open the Device Manager.  One way to do that is to right-click on "My
Computer", select the Hardware tab, and select Device Manager.

Expand "IDE ATA/ATAPI Controllers" and double-click on "Primary IDE
Channel".

Under the "Advanced Settings" tab, check the "Device 1" setting.  More
than likely, your current transfer mode is set to PIO.

Set it to "DMA if available".

Repeat the step for the "Secondary IDE Channel" if you have devices
attached to it.  Reboot.





8)Load Internet Explorer the Fastest Way Possible



Edit your link to start Internet Explorer to have -nohome after it.  For
Example:  "C:\Program Files\Internet Explorer\IEXPLORE.EXE" -nohome

This will load internet explorer very fast because it does not load a
web page while it is loading.  If you want to go to your homepage after
it is loaded, just click on the home button.







9)Easy Way to Adjust LargeSystemCache



Normally, the tweak I've seen asks you to go into
HKLM\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\Memory Management
and change the value to either O or 1 to the adjustment the
LargeSystemCache.



However, in Windows XP, all you have to do is:



Right-click My Computer.

Select Properties.

Click Advanced.

Choose Performance.

Click Advanced again.

Select either Programs or System Cache under Memory Usage.

Programs = 0 for the registry tweak equivalent

System Cache = 1 for the registry tweak equivalent





10)Shutdown XP Faster



Like previous versions of windows, it takes long time to restart or
shutdown windows XP when the "Exit Windows" sound is enabled.  To solve
this problem you must disable this useless sound.



Click Start button.

Go to settings > Control Panel > Sound, Speech and Audio devices >
Sounds and Audio Devices > Sounds.

Then under program events and windows menu click on "Exit Windows"
sub-menu and highlight it.  Now from sounds you can select, choose
"none" and then click Apply and OK.

Now you should see some improvements when shutting down your system.







11)Easily Disable Messenger



Go into:  C:/Program Files/Messenger.  Rename the Messenger folder to
"MessengerOFF".

This does not slow down Outlook Express or hinder system performance.









12)Turn Off Autoplay for Program CDs



How can you stop Windows XP from launching program CDs?



Click Start, click Run, type GPEDIT.MSC to open Group Policy in the
Microsoft Management Console.

Double-click Computer Configuration, double-click Administrative
templates, double-click System, and then click Turn off autoplay.

The instructions on your screen describe how to configure this setting.
Click Properties to display the setting dialog.

Click Enabled, and choose CD-ROM drives, then click OK, to stop CD
autoplay.

This setting does not prevent Autoplay for music CDs.







13)Synchronize Your Computer Clock with an Internet Time Server



Does your computer have the right time?  If your computer is not part of
a domain, you can synchronize your computer clock with an Internet time
server.  To do so:



Double–click the time on your task bar.

Click the Internet Time tab.

Select the time server you want to use and make sure to select the
Automatically synchronize with an Internet time

server check box.









14)Win XP Won’t Completely Shutdown



Go to Control Panel, then go to Power Options.

Click on the APM tab, then check the "Enable Advanced Power Management
support."

Shut down your PC.

It should now successfully complete the Shut Down process.







15)Adjust Various Visual Effects



Open up the Control Panel.

Go under System and click on the Advanced tab.

Click settings under Performance options.

You can now change various graphical effects (mainly animations and
shadows).









16)Disable Error Reporting



Open Control Panel.

Click on Performance and Maintenance.

Click on System.

Then click on the Advanced tab.

Click on the error-reporting button on the bottom of the windows.

Select Disable error reporting.

Click OK.  Click OK.







17)Increase Your Cable Modem or DSL Speed in XP



This tweak is for broad band cable connections on stand alone machines
with WinXP professional version - might work on Home version also.  It
may also work with networked machines as well.



This tweak assumes that you have let WinXP create a connection on
install for your cable modem/NIC combination and that your connection
has tcp/ip - QoS - file and print sharing - and client for Microsoft
networks , only, installed.  It also assumes that WinXP will detect your
NIC and has in-box drivers for it.  If it doesn't do not try this.



In the "My Network Places" properties (right-click on the desktop icon
and choose properties), highlight the connection

then at the menu bar choose "Advanced" then "Advanced Settings".
Uncheck the two boxes in the lower half for the

bindings for File and Printer sharing and Client for MS networks.  Click
OK.

18)Stop Jerkey Graphics



If you are connected to a LAN and have problems with jerkey graphics,
this might be the solution:



Right-click "MyComputer".

Select "Manage".

Click on "Device Manager".

Double-click on your NIC under "Network Adapters".

In the new window, select the "Advanced" tab.

Select "Connection Type" and manually set the value of your NIC.  (Not
"Auto Sense" which is default.).

You should reboot.









19)Speeding Up Your Old Shit Pentium by 50%



We all know that you really shouldn't try to run Windows XP on anything
less that about a Pentium 3 of some sort if you are out for speedy
operations and amazing reaction times, but for those of us with the good
old Pentium 2's who want to see just how well we can run XP, we have to
tweak as much as we can where-ever we can.  A real killer to the
system's performance is Windows Media Player.  Although it may look
desirable and fancy with it's rounded off edges and 3rd-Dimensional
appearance, the truth is, it takes up a large amount of that precious
processing power.  All of these troubles however, lead to one thing in
particular with this 'new-look' over-rated music and video player...the
Visualizations.  The look-great I'll admit but like a lot of software
these days, it has no purpose.  If you run the task manager, and click
the Performance tab along the top, you'll see that when Windows Media
Player is running and nothing else is active, it takes up around 50% of
the processors power.  Once these visualizations are turned off, it
barely takes up 2-3% of the processors power, which leaves much more
room for other applications to work efficiently.



Here's how to disable the feature:



Open Media Player.

Make sure the Now Playing tab on the left is selected.

Click the View menu along the top.

Go down to Now Playing Tools







20) Turn Off System Restore to Save Space



By default, Windows XP keeps a backup of system files in the System
Volume Information folder.  This can eat up valuable space on your hard
drive.  If you don't want Windows to back up your system files:



Open the Control Panel.



Double-click on System.



Click the System Restore tab.



Check "Turn off System Restore on all drives".



Hit Apply.



You may now delete the System Volume Information folder.


Windows xp Tips - Part 2



1) Shutdown Button on Desktop

Right click on ur Desktop and create new Shortcut and type
“C:\WINDOWS\SYSTEM32\Shutdown.exe –s” without quotes in the popup box
which will appear asking for a path of shortcut . Now when u will double
click this shortcut it will give u shutdown message and ur computer will
shutdown after some seconds.  U can customize ur shutdown button with
same icon which original shutdown have Just go to the properties of ur
shortcut and click change icon tab select any icon u like and click
apply.

Similarly u can also put restart button on ur desktop just replace –s in
above line by –r

If u don’t want shutdown button on ur desktop u can the go to start >run
and type

Shutdown –s or –r they will do the same job.  If someone tries to
shutdown u remotely on the net then u can stop shutdown process but
typing shutdown –a in Run.

Shutdown –s = Shutdown & restart

Shutdown –r = Restart

Shutdown –a = To abort shutdown



2) Cracking windows xp admin and user passwords.

I hope u guys liked tip given for resetting passwords in first part.  If
u have guest or limited user account on PC than that control
userpasswords2 tip does not help u much.  Windows will still ask u admin
password for resetting users passwords .

Ok go and Download a tool called CIA COMMANDER this is just what we
want.  This tool will create a copy protected bootable floppy which will
allow u to boot any computer and also help u to get into any NTFS
partition .First select floppy as first bootable device from BIOS.  CIA
shows u every thing to u in GUI.

After booting CIA will allow u to reset any user password even
administrator’s password.  It also includes a file manager, registry
editor and a text/hex editor.  Present version of CIA does not support
FAT partitions but sooner its new version will even support FAT
partition based system.

I have read on some tutorials about a tool called NTFS Pro which looks
almost like CIA .

3).  Correcting System Hang at Startup



If your system hangs about 2 or 3 minutes at startup, where you can't
access the Start

button or theTaskbar, it may be due to one specific service (Background
Intelligent

Transfer) running in the background.  Microsoft put out a patch for this
but it didn't

work for me.  Here's what you do

Click on Start/Run, type 'msconfig', then click 'OK'.

Go to the 'Services' tab, find the 'Background Intelligent Transfer'
service.

Disable it, apply the changes & reboot.





4) Editing explorer in windows xp

Editing explore in windows xp is very easy with available tools its not
as difficult like old dos based tedious method here u need just one tool
called RESOURCE HACKER

It is a resource viewer it will show u Resources in any 32bit Windows
95/98/ME/NT/2000 executable files (including exe’s, dll’s, ocx’s and
cpl’s) . ok go in to ur windows directory and find explorer.exe and make
its two copies name them

As explorer_1 and explorer_2 .exe respectively and keep them in windows
folder only.  We will edit explorer_1 and will keep explorer_2 as backup
copy if anything goes wrong.  Open explorer_1.exe in resource hacker and
go to String table and edit whatever u want to even u can change start
button by ur name or anything else

After editing even a single word do not forget to click the COMPILE
button.  Change icon or u can change animated message such as when u
install a new programs so when u go to all programs a animated message
comes “New Program Installed” u can change it by ur sentence etc. now we
have edited the explore_1 now go To File menu in Resource hacker and
save it as explorer_1.exe it will ask u that explorer_1.exe is already
present do u want to replace it, click YES.  Now we have our edited
explorer.

Now restart ur computer in safe mode with command prompt by pressing F8
during booting process . Now we will copy explorer_1.exe on explorer.exe
by typing command Copy C:\windows\explorer_1.exe C:\windows\explorer.exe

Now restart ur computer and what u will seeing that u r working with ur
edited explorer.  If anything goes wrong than just copy explorer_2.exe
on explorer.exe by same process.







5) Speed Up Detailed View in Explorer



If you like to view your files in Windows Explorer using the "Details"
view here is a tweak to speed up the listing of file attributes:



Viewing files in Windows Explorer using the "Details" mode shows various
attributes associated with each file shown.  Some of these must be
retrieved from the individual files when you click on the directory for
viewing.  For a directory with numerous and relatively large files (such
as a folder in which one stores media, eg:  *.mp3's, *.avi's etc.),
Windows Explorer lags as it reads through each one.  Here's how to
disable viewing of unwanted attributes and speed up file browsing:



Open Windows Explorer.

Navigate to the folder which you wish to optimize.

In "Details" mode right-click the bar at the top which displays the
names of the attribute columns.

Uncheck any that are unwanted/unneeded.

Explorer will apply your preferences immediately, and longs lists of
unnecessary attributes will not be displayed.

Likewise, one may choose to display any information which is regarded as
needed, getting more out of Explorer.







6) Remove Hibernation File



If you do not use hibernation, make sure you do not have it enabled,
which reserves disk space equal to your RAM.  If you have a hidden file
on the root directory of your C-drive called hiberfil.sys, hibernation
is enabled.  To remove that file:



Go to Control Panel, select Performance and Maintenance, Power Options,
Hibernate tab, and uncheck the Enable hibernation box.







7) Change Drive Letters in Windows XP



When you add drives to your computer, such as an extra hard drive, a CD
drive, or a storage device that corresponds to a drive, Windows
automatically assigns letters to the drives.  However, this assignment
might not suit your system; for example, you might have mapped a network
drive to the same letter that Windows assigns to a new drive.  When you
want to change drive letters, follow these steps:



Right-click My Computer, and then click Manage.

Under Computer Management, click Disk Management.  In the right pane,
you’ll see your drives listed.  CD-ROM drives are listed at the bottom
of the pane.

Right-click the drive or device you want to change, and then click
Change Drive Letter and Paths.

Click Change, click Assign the following drive letter, click the drive
letter you want to assign, and then click OK.







8) Do Not Highlight Newly Installed Programs



Tired of that annoying little window that pops up to tell you that new
software is installed?  If it gets in the way when you’re logging off,
turn it off completely.  To do this:



Click Start, right-click at the top of the Start menu where your name is
displayed, and then click Properties.

In the Taskbar and Start Menu Properties dialog box, on the Start Menu
tab, click Customize.

Click the Advanced tab, and then clear the Highlight newly installed
programs check box.

Click OK, and then click OK again.







9) Change the Default Opening Folder in Windows Explorer



By default, Windows Explorer opens showing the My Documents folder.  To
change the default setting so that all top–level drives and folders are
shown, follow these steps:



Click Start > Programs > Accessories, then right–click Windows Explorer,
and click Properties.

Under Target field, which reads %SystemRoot%\explorer.exe, add to make
the line read:



%SystemRoot%\explorer.exe /n, /e, /select, C:\



Click OK.





10) Identify a 16-bit Program



Use Windows Explorer to open the folder that contains the program's
executable (.exe) file.

Right-click the .exe file, and then click Properties.

A 16-bit program does not have a Version tab in this dialog box.











11) Use the Desktop Cleanup Wizard in Windows XP



To start the Desktop Cleanup Wizard:



Click Start , and then click Control Panel.

In Control Panel, click Appearance and Themes under Pick a category.

Under or pick a Control Panel icon , click Display.  The Display
Properties dialog box is displayed.

In the Display Properties dialog box, click the Desktop tab, and then
click Customize Desktop.  The Desktop Items dialog box is displayed.

Under Desktop cleanup , click to clear the Run Desktop Cleanup Wizard
every 60 days check box if you do not want the Desktop Cleanup Wizard to
automatically start every 60 days.



Click Clean Desktop Now.  The Desktop Cleanup Wizard starts.







12) Remove Unwanted Shortcuts



In the Welcome to the Desktop Cleanup Wizard dialog box, click Next.

In the Shortcuts dialog box, a list of shortcuts are displayed in the
Shortcut to Clean Up list.  The shortcuts that you click are removed
from the desktop and placed in the Unused Desktop Shortcuts folder on
the Windows desktop.



If you do not want a shortcut to be removed from the desktop, click to
clear the check box for that shortcut, and then click Next when you are
finished.



In the Completing the Desktop Cleanup Wizard dialog box, view the items
in the Shortcuts box to confirm that you want them removed from the
desktop, and then click Finish.

The Desktop Cleanup Wizard moves the selected shortcuts to the Unused
Desktop Shortcuts folder and then quits.







13) Restore Shortcuts



If a shortcut that you want is removed, follow these steps to restore
the shortcut:



On the Desktop, double-click the Unused Desktop Shortcuts folder.  The
Unused Desktop Shortcuts dialog box is displayed.  Note:  If the Unused
Desktop Shortcuts dialog box is maximized, click the Restore Down button
(appears to the left of the red Close button).



Drag the shortcut that you want to the Windows desktop.

Close the Unused Desktop Shortcuts dialog box.





14) How to Turn On Automatic Updates



Click Start , click Control Panel , and then double-click System.

Click the Automatic Updates tab, and then click one of the following
options:



- Download the updates automatically and notify me when they are ready
to be installed.  (This is the default setting.)

- Notify me before downloading any updates and notify me again before
installing them on my computer.





15) How to Turn Off Automatic Updates



Click Start , click Control Panel , and then double-click System.

Click the Automatic Updates tab, and then click Turn off automatic
updating.  I want to update my computer manually.





16) How to Update Your Files Manually by Using Windows Update



If you choose not to use automatic updating, you can still install
specific updates from the Windows Update Web site.  Windows Update is a
catalog of items such as drivers, security fixes, critical updates, the
latest Help files, and Internet products that you can download to keep
your computer up-to-date.



Click Windows Update in Help and Support Center.

On the Windows Update home page, click Scan for updates.

Click Yes when you are prompted to install any required software or
device drivers.







17) How to Have Windows Remind You About Pending Updates



Click Remind Me Later in the Automatic Updates dialog box before you
download or install the update.

In the Reminder dialog box, you can specify the amount of time Windows
should wait before reminding you.

If the reminder is for downloading, Windows reminds you only when you
are connected to the Internet.

If the reminder is for installing, Windows reminds you according to the
schedule that you specify.







18) How to Download Available Updates



If you configured automatic updating to notify you before downloading
any updates, an icon is displayed in the notification area each time new
updates are found.



Double-click the icon in the notification area.

Do either of the following steps:



If you want Windows to download an update, make sure that the check box
beside it is selected.

-or-

If you do not want Windows to download an update, click to clear the
check box beside it.

Your selected updates are downloaded in the background; this behavior
allows you to continue working uninterrupted.  Downloading does not
interfere with or slow down other network activity, such as Internet
browsing.



When downloading is finished, the icon is displayed in the notification
area to notify you that updates are ready to be installed.







19) How to Pause or Resume Downloading



After the download process has started, you can pause or resume
downloading at any time.  If you close your Internet connection or
restart your computer after pausing a download process, Windows
automatically resumes the download process the next time you are
connected to the Internet.



During the download process, click the icon that is displayed in the
notification area, and then click Pause.

When you are ready for Windows to start downloading again, click the
Automatic updating icon, and then click

Resume.



Restore an Update that You Previously Declined



If you decide not to download a specific update, you can prompt Windows
Update to offer that update again.



Click Start , click Control Panel, and then double-click System.

Click the Automatic Updates tab, and then click Restore Declined
Updates.







20) Using the Ultimate Configuration Tool (Professional Edition Only)



One of the most full featured Windows XP configuration tools available
is hidden right there in your system, but most people don't even know it
exists.  It's called the Local Group Policy Editor, or gpedit for short.
It just like old Poledit.exe.



To start this editor:



Select Start and then Run, then type the following:



gpedit.msc

After you hit Enter, you'll be greeted by gpedit, which lets you modify
almost every feature in Windows XP without having to go to regedit.

